who wouldn't love acing a geography exam
remembering all the locations of the
countries on a map or avoiding
embarrassing situations up suddenly
forgetting the person's name standing
right in front of you it turns out that
memory like other muscles in the body
can be strengthened and enhanced but
instead of practicing with flashcards
there may be an interesting way that we
can hack our memory while we sleep why
do we sleep this has been a question
asked since the early days of
civilization and while we may not know
the exact answer there are a number of
really good theories about why we need
it sleep is when the brain transfers
short-term memories experienced
throughout the day into long term
memories this process is called memory
consolidation and it's the memory
consolidation theory that have
scientists wondering if we can enhance
certain memories over others there was a
paper recently in the journal science by
Kent poller and his colleagues at
Northwestern that seemed to show that
this may be true and that piqued our
curiosity Jude has been working on a DIY
version of this task to see if we can
prove memories through the use of sound
and sleep so Jude how do you test if we
can prove our memories with sleep we the
human subject we have a memory game that
we have on an iPad and then we make our
subject play this game and I remember
the images and where they appear on the
screen so this is like a memory game
used to play with your child which which
picture was way exactly and we tie each
picture with a sound that represents
that picture so if you can see a picture
of a car for example anyone's here on
the car engine just before you go to
sleep we're gonna test you we're gonna
see how well do you remember where the
pictures are every time you see the
picture you're gonna hear the sound and
now comes the experiment you're gonna go
take a nap
and while you're sleeping we're gonna be
recording your aegs and then we wait for
them to go into what is called the slow
waves key which is the deepest phase of
your sleep or it's really hard for you
to wake up okay pause so here's some
information on sleep there are four
stages we have lighter stages of sleep
and REM what we're interested is called
slow-wave sleep and it gets its name
from the electrical signals called delta
waves that we record from the brain now
this is the part of sleep where
scientists believe that memory
consolidation can happen in this deep
period of sleep we're gonna do something
that you don't know that we're gonna do
here's where the tricky part comes and
we start playing or accuse do you play
all the cues from the things okay no the
interesting point is we only eat when a
play half of them to see if there's a
difference so your hypothesis is the one
that they were listening to while
they're sleeping they're a new better at
when they wake up yes exactly
when you wake back up and you play the
game again do you do better or worse
than before a nap what we found is that
if we played you a cue during your sleep
for example a car you remember the
position of that car when you woke back
up again
but if we didn't tell you the cue during
the sleep for example with guitar you'd
be less likely to remember that guitar
when you woke up the memories that were
cued they remembered better than the
ones they weren't even though when they
woke up they don't remember hearing
those yes exactly we asked you know
they're sleeping they can't hear it they
wake up they do better on those and the
ones that you did yeah
yeah so maybe yeah it's like magic wood
you ran this experiment on 12 people and
the results were significant so it's not
that you remember things better it's
that you forget them less now is a huge
skeptic when I first heard that you can
do better in a memory task just by
playing sounds during sleep but we
replicated these experiments for
ourselves the facts and memories that we
collect throughout the day are very
fragile and they're easily lost and
forgotten but by reactivating them
during sleep even without us being aware
it seems like we can make them more
stable and less prone to forgetting now
that's pretty incredible
our brains are still active even when
we're not so if you're like me and a bit
forgetful perhaps a solution is a pair
headphones and a soft couch
[Music]